
5/19/2023. First impressions of Chapter 1, Why Trust Science

Can we agree on a definition of what constitutes a scientific 'method'?

The concept I would like to have a name for is this: the rules of rationality at
a given time in human history - the rules by which a scientific claim is
justified or rejected. Rules of validation and falsification. I am not sure when
writers talk about 'method' that is what they have in mind. So would it make
sense to use a different terminology to specifically denote the basic rules of
validation in science? Perhaps 'scientific validation criteria'.

The basic thesis of the book as revealed in the first chapter seems to be that
having diversity in scientific communities can significantly increase the
chances both of the justifyability, and of the public's acceptance of scientific
claims. 

It is important, though, to separate out the two parts of this thesis: the
effect of diversity on scientific justification vs its effect on public
acceptance. I will take each one in turn.

People have blind spots. And a homogeneous scientific community is likely to
have shared blind spots. Certain deeply-embedded assumptions of the members of
the community may affect consensus on certain claims, when in fact they may
be irrelevant to those claims.

Diversity can help uncover such assumptions and thereby increase the chance
of a rational consensus. 

That seems like a reasonable assumption.

But the extent to which diversity might in fact reduce errors in scientific
claims is not clarified in Chapter 1. It would be nice to have some examples.
Also the effect of diversity may be more pronounced in social sciences than in
physical sciences. Chapter 1 does not make distinctions at that level.

Although diversity is not defined precisely, it seems from the chapter's
emphasis on feminism, and from references to race and gender, that the intent is
racial, ethnic, and gender diversity.

The most general notion of diversity, however, can quickly lead to trouble in
the arguments for it in scientific communities. 

Is it reasonable to include in scientific communities representatives from the
non-trivial groups of citizens whose religious, ideological, and political views
would trump our current rules of rationality in scientific communities?  

In fact, without additional constraints, increasing diversity in some general
sense can increase the number of deeply-held subjective assumptions in the
community and arguably prevent certain otherwise reasobable scientific claims to
reach consensus.

The chapter emphasizes that the participants should collaborate in good faith
with a shared interest in the truth, be unbiased, non-defensive, self-critical,
be devoid of compromising conflicts of interest, and open to changing their
minds. Points well-taken. But it requires a discussion of how to square these
attributes with the need for diversity. The practical aspects of making sure
that these attributes are present in all members of the community, and, at the
same time, that there is sufficient diversity in the community are not discussed
in this chapter.

The primary consideration, in my view, is the unbiased application of
commonly agreed-upon rules of rationality (my interpretation of the word
'method') to scientific claims. So a higher level question raised by the book is
what is a rational basis for the 'consensus part' of making scientific claims.

Consider Faraday's motor experiment referenced in Chalmers Chaper 13. Faraday
described the experimental effect, and his contemporaries could attempt to
repeat it. There is a set of rules for actually conducting the experiment with
fidelity which can be followed by others. But there is another set of rules for
declaring consensus that the experiment as described does in fact represent a
repeatable physical phnomenon. 

The problem is that even in this well-defined case, some experiments will fail
for various reasons. Yet we do have consensus that a real physical effect
is being described in Faraday's motor. What allows that consensus to happen in
a large community? Clearly, one needs to exclude incompetence, lack of
adequate materials, limited time and resources, and so on, from the results
that can lead to consensus. Doing that requires certain justifiable rules.

Consensus makes sense only when participants in a community are qualified to
examine the evidence and apply accepted rules of rationality to that evidence.
An analogy may be made to the judicial system. It makes no sense to just make
anyone a justice of the supreme court. And the justices are supposed to be able
to apply the law as it stands, and to actually do so.

So much for the rational justification part of the diversity: a great idea 
that nevertheless poses significant questions about participation in a
scientific community.

On the other hand, there is the separate concern of having the general public
follow scientific consensus, just like the concern of having the public respect
the judgments of the supreme court. And diversity seems central to that concern.
It seems reasonable to assume that having like-minded people participate in the
consensus about a claim would increase its chances of acceptance. Of course,
that depends on the definition of 'like-minded', and could easily lead us back
into the difficulty of political and ideological considerations trumping ratioal
ones.

The book may be making two different claims with respect to diversity. That
there is already good reason to believe that diversity would have a significant
effect on the justifyability and the public acceptance of scientific claims. Or
alternatively, that it is worth incereasing diversity anyway because it seems
likely to increase justifiability and public acceptance. 

Hopefully the rest of the book will make that clear and provide additional 
evidence n each case.


