
My take of some of the conclusions.

Consensus

The issue here seems to be the legitimacy of a person in being part of the
consensus for or against a scientific claim. 

The main problem for Oreskes is how to separate out ideologically-motivated 
views from scientifcally legitimate ones in coming up with a "scientific
consensus". In other words, to distinguish scientific consensus from political
consensus.

Ideological views, either intentionally, or unintentionally through confirmation
bias, tend to amplify the importance of scientific evidence in favor of an ideology.
On the other hand, purely ad hominem objections to a well-reasoned argument are 
illegitimate.

So who legitimately belongs to a consensus-building group? One answer given
is reputable "insiders": members of the community with advanced degress,
publications in rigorous journals, research grants, and in general of high
standing in the community.

Several other groups of relevant "outsiders" with direct involvement in the
the relevant domain, such as doctors and nurses in the domain of medicine,
are also discussed.

The problem with insiders is that they can be inbred. Also as we have seen,
there may be legitimate differences between groups that for political reasons
cause one line of research to be stifled.

The problem with outsiders, as I see it, is that it is tricky to exclude 
ideological actors with some following who claim relevance in the consensus
process. Their followers would not be easily convinced.

Method

The main issue is what Oreskes calls "methodological fetishism", strict
adherence to one particular method of discovery in its most rigorous form.
Using partial and somewhat uncertain knowledge gained by different methods, or
by somewhat relaxed application of an existing method may still be beneficial in
decision making.

Evidence

Needs no further elaboration.

Values

A homogeneous scientific community in terms of the values of its members may miss
the role that their values play is affecting scientific conclusions. To
challenge the role of values in scientific claims, it is good to have people of
different values in the the consensus building community. The role of socialist
values in questioning eugenics, and the role of feminist values in questioning 
the limited energy theory are specifically mentioned.

Humility

Needs no further elaboration.

Science as a Form of Pascal's Wager

It seems reasonable to attempt to treat uncertainty as a form of Pascal's wager.

CODA - Values In Science and Conclusions

A premise put forward for the discussion is that science and values are always
intertwined because scientists have values that impact their work, and support
for science has to be justified by community values. No question there.

A conclusion of the discussion is that to promote trust in science when
communicating scientific findings to the public, values should be an explicit
part of the communication. That also seems plausible.

But in getting from the premise to the conclusion there is an implied
denigration of the idea of science as ideally an objective enterprise. Maybe I
am reading too much into the argument. 

In any case, I think it is important to make a clear distinction between 
objective science on the one hand, the influence of values on objectivity on
another, and the way scientific findings are communicated, on the other.

One may strive for objectivity in reaching scientific conclusions independently
of values to the extent possible.

Then there are two different issues regarding values. 

First, clearly values that could give the impression of coloring the conclusions
need to be disclosed.

Second, and separately, values may be used as an aid to promoting affinity in
communicating objectively-reached conclusions to promote affinity with the
conclusions. That to me, seems like unavoidable propaganda. It leaves me
uncomfortable. But in reality it may be nececessary for better collective
decision making.


