
Because of inherent human limitations in actually knowing things, scientific
claims are generally only our best guesses on particular aspects of reality.
And such guesses, not being certain, will generally have associated levels of
confidence.

What are the rules by which we judge evidence for scientific claims, guess that
the totality of evidence favors or disfavors a claim, and attach a level of
confidence to our guesses? 

As civilizations progress, such rules can change, hopefully in a positive
direction by allowing better guesses to be made with more confidence. 

It is also possible that the rules vary among different scientific communities.

However, if we have any hope of being "rational" about our scientific claims, it
seems that we need to be explicit about the rules governing our guesses.

I call these rules the standards of rationality [at a given time and for a given
community, though I will not repeat these qualifications in every use of the term]. 

I would include as a basis in those standards, the rules of logic, and the rules
of arithmetic.

TODO. Spell out all the rules we know about.

Note that in my definition of the standards of rationality, I have explicitly
excluded mention of the rules that may govern the day-to-day work of scientists.
Clearly, there are also standards of reasonable conduct in particular scientific
communities at any given time, some of which may be motivated by the governing
standards of rationality.

But it is important to make a distinction between the activity of judging a
claim based on evidence, on the one hand, and the activity of attempting to 
produce evidence for or against a claim on the other. In my terminology,
"standards of rationality" are rules that apply to the former activity. 
To make this distinction clear, we may call the rules that apply to the latter 
activity "standards of procedure".

I tend to avoid using the common term "scientific method" because to me 
it confounds the two concepts of judgement and procedure in science.

I am willing to allow considerable flexibility in procedure. 
But when it comes to judgement, it seems to me, we need a firm grip on 
the governing constituitional regime. The bar for changing the constitution, 
that is, our standards of rationality, should be quite high. We can't just 
change those standards willy-nilly. That would make a mockery of rationality.

In 'Why Trust Science?', Naomi Oreskes argues for scientific consensus as the
main requirement for our guesses on scientific claims. In my view, that
characterization, while clearly relevant, misses the point. It gives the
impression that the validity of a claim is merely a matter of the opinion of the
expert practitioners in a field, without acknowledging the idea of the
rationality or irrationality of a claim relative to a set of standards.

Clearly, judging the evidence for a claim cannot be entirely a matter of the
opinions of a number of people, whatever their level of expertise. To the extent
that our standards of rationality are spelled out, they must be applied in
verifying a claim independently of opinion. Where the standards are vague and
leave room for opinionated judgement, of course, that level of judgement from
experts in a field is unavoidable. However, a judgemnet that is not based on the
canonized and explicitly stated standards of rationality should be called out as
such, and clearly it must be given less weight than a judgement that is
supported by the prevailing standards.

We can apply the same treatment to mathemetics itself.

There is a distinction between accepting an axiomatic system for judging the
truth of a proposition, that is, the rules of rationality for a particular
branch of mathematics, on the one hand, and accepting a particular proof of a
proposition based on that axiomatic system, on the other.

The acceptance of the axioms requires a major leap of faith in a way that the
acceptance of a given proof does not. Working within such a system, a particular
proof becomes, in principle, a mechanical process, which can be checked by a
proof assistant. If the human-provided proof has errors or gaps in logic, the
proof assistant can detect the errors and fill in the gaps.

To be sure, like all human-engineered physical processes, the proof assistant
itself is subject to inaccuracies.

But the likelihood of those inaccuracies may easily be reduced by testing,
independent inspection, and comparison of independent implementations.

Since the accuracy of no gadget can be guaranteed 100%, one may make a
philosophical argument that using a well-vetted proof assistant requires a leap
of faith in the accuracy of the proof assistant, and is ultimately an
opinionated enterprise. But is that characterization helpful in any way? We must
do our best within the boundaries of our limitations.

On the other hand, accepting the use of a particular axiomatic system requires a
qualitatively different leap of faith. There are fundamental issues such as
completeness, orthogonality, understandability, and consistency that are not so
easily taken care of by inspection and testing. The axioms and rules of
inference are generally the result of centuries of painstaking reflection,
debate, evolution, and correction, and are chosen based on their ability to as
completely and consistently as possible so far to our knowledge to be applicable
to modeling a variety of situations.  As such they are not to be trifled with at
the drop of a hat, because the utility of a purportedly corrected set of rules
in terms of completeness, consistency, and so on, cannot be demonstrated that
easily.

In axiomatic mathematics, the rules by which we judge proofs are completely
spelled out, the rules unamgiguously govern the proof of a proposition, and the
bar for chaging those rules is very high.

In science, there are, or, I am arguing, there should be, stated sets of rules
by which we judge the validity of a scientific claim. Those rules too are the
product of centuries of trial and error, reflection, and debate, and as such
there should be a very high bar for their evolution.

The difference in science is that our propositions are rated guesses, and the
rules do not necessarily govern the validation of our guesses unambuguously.
However, that does not mean that the guesses are entirely a matter of expert
opinion. To the extent that our stated standards guide the validation of our
guesses about a scientific claim, the standards should be used, and they should
given priority over guesswork that is not explicitly supported by the standards.

As a simple example, suppose that a claim is based on a set of arithmetic
calculations on data obtained from experiments. Clearly the calculations can 
be checked mechanically. Their validity is not a matter of expert opinion
in any practically useful way.

