
Chapter 9 - Lakatos

Pronounced "lakatosh".

Lakatos's philosophy is a reaction to some of the issues in the accounts of Kuhn
and Popper.

Motivations:

- Reduce Kuhn's over-emphasis on the sociological aspect of scientific progress. 

- Extend the reach of the philosophy of science to "softer" sciences, sociology,
  psychology, etc.

- Take into account that a falsification may be due to other factors than the 
  underlying theory.

Lakatos uses the term "research program" as "a" (rather than "the") locus of
work in a scientific field at a given time. In contrast to Kuhn, who assumes a
single dominant "paradigm" at a given time in a given field, Lakatos allows for
multiple competing research programs in a given field to exist at the same time.

A research program accepts certain theories and experimental practices as given,
like axioms. These are called the "hard core" of the program. The hard core is 
inviolable and immutable as far as the particular research program in concerned. 

At a given time, a research program will also hypothesize certain tentative
theories and experimental practices. These are called the program's "protective
shell". The combination of the hard core and the protective layer form the
working model [my term] of the research program.

Rather than use the strongly negative term "falsification" of a theory, Lakatos
uses the more neutral term "anomaly" of a theory. At any given time in the life
of a research program, its working model may have a number of unexplained
"anomalies", that is, seeming falsifications. 

Because the blame for the anomalies may lie in the experimental setup or in the
initial conditions of an experiment, the hard core of the research progarm is
not abandoned. Instead, the practitioners of the research program attempt to
adjust the presuppositions of the outer protective layer in such a way that the
new working model can satisfactorily explain the anomalies.

Anomalies will continue to be discovered and worked on in a research program.
An anomaly may be dealt with by a fundamental explanation of the source of the
seeming falsification in terms of experimental setup or initial condition, or by
an adjustment in the basic theories of the outer protective layer.

There is still the issue of ad hoc modification vs intellectually honest
modification of a theory discussed in earlier chapters. TODO. Precise
definition of ad hoc modification.

As a resaerch program progresses, some anomalies will be satisfactorily
explained. In Lakatos, a research program is "degenerating" when its set of
satisfactorily explained anomalies is not growing significantly. A "progressing"
research program is one in which the set of satisfactorily explained anomalies
keeps growing. That means that new discoveries are being made by the program.

Some practioners may stubbornly cling to a research program even if by all
accounts it appears to be degenerating, in the hope of finding solutions
to the anomalies without abandoning the program's hard core. This is 
not necessarily irrational, since, as shown, for example, by the Copernican
revolution, it may take a century to satifactorily explain a theory's anomalies
by further advances in experimental techniques, in the fomulation of initial 
consitions, and in tinkering with the theory. 

Other practitioners may abandon a research program for a competing one with a
different hard core after a reasonable sustained effort without success in
dealing with its persistent anomalies. That too, is not necessarily irrational. 

Whether the maintenance or the abandonment of a research program is correct, can
only be judged historically in the fullness of time, according to Lakatos.

Lakatos does not proscribe a rational basis for abandoning a research program in
favor of another. So this activity is tacitly left to the existing practioners
of the field. Thus, even though Lakatos is seeking a more rational scheme for
demarcating science from pseudo-science, in the heat of a crisis within a
reaserch program, we are not guided by Lakatos on whether to abandon it or not
using some rational criteria. 

It is just that when most practioners have abandoned a seemingly degenrating
reaserch program, it kind of fades away, and other research programs that have
more practitioners become prominent. In this respect, Lakatos has to concede 
to Kuhn that the idea of progress is a sociological one among a field's 
practioners.

This is the basic idea. There is a lot more that is presented in the book.

But I am going to stop here since my main aim in studying the philosophy of
science is in distinguishing science from pseudo-science. So far in the book,
this issue has been reduced to trying to come up with a rational basis for
prefering one theory over another (rather than attempting to attach a notion of
"truth" to a theory). 

Lakatos's best answer to the question of a rational comparison between theories
relies on the idea of a dicovery. A discovery is a new prediction made by a
working model.

Paraphrasing profusely now: The working model of one research program is to be
preferred to another if it leads to more discoveries, and the more unexpected
the discoveries the better. Of course, this formulation ignores a comparison
between the unexplained anomalies of the two models.


