
Chapter 6 - Sophisticated Falsification

The view of the progress in a scientific field by falsification works as
follows: At any given time, we have as-yet-unfalsified theories about a field
that constitute our best guess as to how the world operates in that particular
area. When one of our theories is falsified, we look for a better theory that 
removes the given falsification, and otherwise remains unfalsified given 
the existing models and machineries available for falsification.

Thus we have a process of constnat modification of theories where a modified
theory is better at explaining the real world than its falsified predecessor.

However, not all attempts at theory modification will do. A legitimate 
modification must provide a better explanation of the situation at hand

Suppose we have a theory that is falsified by some test. We can always modify
the theory to exclude that particular test, without adding any further machinery
to the theory in termms of what patterns of input/output it allows and what
patterns it excludes. The resulting theory is contrived. Similarly contrived is
a modification that postulates the addition of some unobservable artifacts to
the original theory to get around its falsification. 

The example given in Chalmers is Galileo's observation of mountains and valleys
on the moon, which falsified the Aristotelian theory that celestial bodies are
perfect spheres. An attempt to salvage the Aristotelian theory is to postulate
that the moon's surface is covered by an ocean of invisible material that render
the moon a perfect sphere. The argument is contrived. There would be no way
to falsify such a claim, and so it is ruled out in sophisticated falsification.

Contrived modifications are called "ad hoc" by Chalmers.

A reasonable modification is one which provides a different observable model of
the world. Generally this means that the model entails different falsification
tests than the original model.

There is a discussion about "bold" versus "cautious" conjectured theories, and
how they affect the progress of science. A bold conjecture is one that provides
a great deal more opportunity for falsification than the theory it attempts to
replace. A cautious one only provides few additional opportunities for
falsification. If a bold conjecture is offered to modify a theory and it cannot
be falsified upon sustained attack, that represents a major advance in science.
It is a great deal more informative than its predecessor. If a cautious
conjectire is actually falsified, that too represents a major advance in
science, since hitherto it would have been taken for granted that it would be
confirmed.

Conversely when a bold conjecture is falsified, that is not a big deal - yet 
another crazy idea bites the dust! Similar when a cautious conjecture resists
falsification, that is not a big deal either, that would have been expected.

A different view of boldness of a conjecture is given by the novelty of its
prediction in the light of background knowledge about a field at the time.
A bold conjecture predicts new behavior that would hitherto have not been
guessed or considered likely. When such a bold conjecture resists falsification
and becomes accepted as our best guess about a state of affairs, that is big
news, the new theory is considered significant.

