
Chapter 7 - Limitations of Falsification

The fundamental problem discussed in this chapter is the fallibility of
falsifications. How can one be sure that an observational statement
falsifying a theory describes the actual state of affairs occurring in an
experiment. There is always the possibility that the equipment was faulty, the
current observational technology not quite adequate, or that the initial
conditions of the experiment did not match the actual conditions in the real
world at the time.

To complicate matters further, the theoretical foundation applicable in a given
experiment may be a complex of specific theories, and the initial conditions, a
complex of specific conditions. When we get a falsifying observational
statement in such a situation, the contradiction may be the fault of any one of
the impacting theories, or it may be due to the faulty description of any one of
the initial conditions.

Chalmers provides a variety of examples from the history of science in which 
it was not obvious to start with how to interpret a falsification. In many cases, 
sorting out the apparent contradictions and assigning blame to a theory or 
to the initial conditions or to the experimental setup can take years. 
Often the problem is sorted out slowly by incremental advances in theory 
and in the technology of experimental setup and observation of initial 
condition.

One prominent example of this type of evolution of blame given by Chalmers is
the evolution of understanding of the Copernican theory of the movement of earth
and the planets - that the earth is not the center of the universe, and instead 
that the earth and the planets revolve around the sun, and that the earth 
spins around each day.

It took a century from the time Copernicus suggested his theory, through
Galileo's construction of his telescopes and his theoretical contributions to the
laws of motion, to Newton's theories of motion and gravity to finally settle the
fact that various observational objections to the Copernican theory could be
addressed, thus leading to the acceptance of Copernicus. During that time, the
Copernican conjecture survived as a viable contender, and little by little the
objections were addressed by advances in theory and observational technology.

The upshot is that falsification per se does not provide a complete account of
how science actually evolves over time. The process of verifying falsifications
and evolving the corresponding theories and experimental practices often remains
quite messy and uncertain as the real contradictions in apparent observational
statements and the theory are sorted out.

