
Chapters 14, 15 - The Relationship between Theories and Reality

These two final chapters include a wealth of materials on the relationship
between scientific theories and reality. These chapters look to me like a
pot-pouri of interesting ideas about theories and reality that had to be
included in the book. I will not attempt to list the pot pouri. Instead, I 
will describe just the basic ideas in my own words.

First some preliminaries. Theories generally need an ontology. Let's assume, for
simplicity and specificity, that an ontology is a listing of the types of
entities the theory is concerned with, a listing of the properties of each type
of entity, and a listing of the possible relationships between various types of
entities. Properties can be thought of as unary relations, so that, basically,
an ontology would be a listing of entity and relationship types.

A theory then constrains the relationships of the ontology in some way. If the
theory is correct, then certain collections of relationships between entities
are excluded as being observable in the real world.

As a trivial example, consider the "theory" of velocity. The entities of the
theory are particles and events (designating the observation of a particle).
Particles have velocity as their property. Events have particles, time, and
position as their properties. And for a particle with a constant velocity, the
set of events observed for that particle cannot be arbitrary. The events
observed for a given particle must obey the "law" of constant velocity.

I realize that this may be an oversimplification of the notion of a theory.
But I need something concrete to hold on to in discussing the nature of
theories. And for now this simple treatment should do.

With that concrete model of a theory in mind, we can now explore the
relationship between theories and reality. 

The basic idea is called the correspondence principle: a theory is true if
reality follows the theory. There are two sides to this claim. First the
constraints imposed by the theory on its relationships should not be violated in
reality: a true theory is not falsified. Second, all collections of
relationships allowed by the theory should actually be observed in the real
world: evidence for the theory should exhaust all possible cases of the theory.

Chapters 14 and 15 discuss two different dichotomies in conceptualizing
theories. 

In chapter 14 the dichotomy is between thinking of a theory as the specification
of a "regularity" in nature versus thinking of a theory as a specification of
the "propensity" of various entities to act in certain ways when they appear in
certain contexts (that is when they appear in specific roles in ceratin
relations (in our simple model)).

In chapter 15, the dichotomy is between thinking of the entities and relations
of a theory's ontology as "real" (actually corresponding to real world objects
and relations), versus as "artificial" [my word, which I am using for emphasis].

The regularity view of a law can be thought of as a factorization of a set of
similar experimental observations. We see that a set of experiments yield
similar results and we factor out the similarities into a law (a la induction).
These could be observations of the regular behavior of matter under certain
conditions over time, such that later observations happen to be a function of
earlier ones. But in the regularity view, the functional relationship between
earlier and later observations is not central. That there is some regular
relationship, some constraint between the values observed earlier and later, is
all that matters.

In the propensity view of a law, on the other hand, causation, that is 
the functional relationship between observations over time plays a central 
role. Matter is forced to behave in a causal way by its propensity to 
act in a given manner in a given situation.

To me the distinction between the real/fake view of a theory's entities and
relations (discussed in chapter 15) is a more interesting dichotomy, since it is
quite relevant to the question of science vs pseudo-science, as science purports
to describe the "real" world out there, making the use of "artificial" entities
in theories suspect.

In a sense, the idea of assigning behavioral propensities to entities 
seems artificial as well. To be further elaborated.

An accepted example of an artificail entity is the ether. The problem, of
course, is that the ether was considered for a long time to be a real entity.

It is non-controversial to consider certain entities, such as iron, glass, 
wire, as real. They can be observed and their types easily distinguished.

In other cases, the best one can do is consider an entity as not necessarily
real but as a tool to make reasoning about reality easier. This is the case for
the ether. It is also the case for the idea of "propensity" to behave, and the
idea of causation. All we can really say in a theory is that there are some
constraints between events. But thinking about some of the constraints as
causation makes it easier to reason about the evolution of events.

It seems harder, on the other hand, to think of entities such as electrons and
electromagnetic fields as mere tools for making reasoning about observations
easier.

But because ontologies and theories have been observed to change with changing
paradigms, it seems like the safest approach is to consider the entire ontology
as merely a tool. This is not, however, how most scientists (let alone most
ordinary people) view the world. But however we do think of the real world,
if the theories are founded on the basis only of constraints in the properties
and relations of observable events, it seems we are on relatively safe grounds.

It is also mentioned by Chalmers that once theories are reduced to mathematical 
equations, the equations themselves may remain invariant as the theory and its
ontology changes. The interpretation of the symbols used in the equations
in terms of their real-world references can change, but not the equations
themselves.

