
Chaptera 10 and 11 - Feyerabend

First some background. Both Lakatos's and Feyerabend's work was done in the
context of Kuhn. But Kuhn was basically a historian of science, and the main
thrust of his model was about the history of science and how sociological
concerns drive that history. The aim of trying to come up with a rational
demarcation of science and pseudo-science was not primary in Kuhn's work. And
by implication it seems it was also not primary in Lakatos and Feyerabend.
Rather, all three were mainly concerned with describing what scientist do, how
they do it, and what kinds of scientific activity leads to new discoveries.

The term "[scientific] method" is used mainly for these concerns, but is general
enough to include also the methods of evaluating the legitimacy of scientific
knowledge.

In summary, in any given field of enquiry and at given time in the history of
that field, there is a set of standards and procedures called "method" used by
the scientists in that field to arrive at new knowledge. One can simply try to
describe these standards and procedures and see historically which ones were
successful in generating theories that, in the fullness of time, became part of
the scientific canon. 

But at the time of the proposal of a new theory, the prevailing "method" of the
time may or may not be considered rationally compelling in showing the
correspondence between the theory and reality. 

Feyerabend suggests that important discoveries have been made when a reasonable
analysis of the situation at the time would lead to the conclusion that the
arguments for a new theory were not rationally compelling. Therefore, he
concludes, "anything goes". Feyerabend was very much into freedom in general.
And a special case of his freedom was freedom to pursue scientific hypotheses
without constraints. Since as he tries to argue, important discoveries are 
made in spite of rationally compelling attacks on a theory at its inception,
there should not be any rational constraints on scientific enquiry, and hence 
there is no universal "method" of science. His book called "Against Method" 
elucidates these ideas. 

It is interesting to note that the book was originally conceived as a
point-counterpoint debate, for and against method, in which Lakatos would argue
the "for" side. Alas, Lakatos died before that project would come to fuition,
hence "Against Method" by Feyerabend alone.

Chalmers agrees with Feyerabend that it is far-fetched to think that there is a
universal all-encompassing and ahistorical scientific method applicable
everywehere and at all times. Even if there were such a thing, who are we to say
that we can know today what will be applicable forever.

Where Chalmers poses a serious problem for Feyerabend is in considering such a
method as ahistorical, that is, immutable over time. For Chalmers, there is no
problem in the idea that at any given time, there is a method that is rationally
acceptable according to the standards of that time, but that the standards of
rationality may evolve over time. When a scientist proposes a new way of looking
at things, he uses the current standards of rationality to convince the
scientific community of the merits of his proposal. This works, according to
Chalmers, because the community as a whole shares the baic tenets of the accepted
method of the time, and also because the aims of the community in doing science
at the time are shared.

If this were not the case, if there were different independent stanards
of rationality and different aims of science that were all held at the
same level of status, that would make it difficult to come to an acceptance
of new ways of looking at things. Let alone to decide where to concentrate
a society's efforts and resources in pushing for new knowledge. In that sense, 
science is different from art.

Having said all that, of course, the accepted method may evolve.

But the basic idea that theories must correspond to observations is, it seems, a
universal ahistorical base method. That is a basic philosophical axiom of
science.  However, by itself it only provides a very general background
assumption about science. As we have seen in earlier chapters, there are all
kinds of "details" about what constitutes a rational method that still need to
be phisophicaly worked out in the context of the basic correspondence principle
of science.

The example used in both Feyerabend's argument against method, and in
Chalmers' rejoinder to Feyerabend is Galileo and the Copernican revolution.
I am skipping the details for now. But it is fascinating to see the 
different lenses through which Feyerabend and Chalmers view Galileo.
For myself, I found Chalmers' lens more compelling.

