
Chapter 4 - Induction

Science attempts to come up with general laws applicable in different regions of
space and time. These general laws are normally justified by making observations
at different places and diffenet times under specific experimental conditions,
seeing patterns in the properties and relations of the observed objects, and
then abstracting those patterns into general statements.

This is the inductive mode of scientific knowldge acquisition.

Induction from a finite set of observed patterns to a general statement about
nature that should hold even for objects never seen and in regions of time and
space in which the abstracted patterns were not observed requires a leap of
faith. In mathematics, induction is taken as an axiom. And so it seems it has to
be in science.

However, in mathematics the axiom of induction is precisely defined. Alas, not
so in science! The application of induction in science to "derive" a law of
nature is a much more complicated affair than the application of induction
in mathematics to derive a general property of numbers.

Chalmers states three conditions that, intuitively, must be satisfied for an
inductive argument to be considered legitimate in justifying a general
scientific law:

"
1. The number of observations forming the basis of a generalization must be large.

2. The observations must be repeated under a wide variety of conditions.

3. No accepted observation statement should conflict with the 'derived' law.
"

Unfortunately, conditions 1 and 2 are vague. Trying to make them precise shows
that they are problematic. Condition 3 is precise. But, according to Chalmers,
it is too restrictive. TBD is a later chapter.

In order to overcome the issues with these conditions, scientists use 
their prior knowledge about the circumstances surrounding a phenomenon
under test, to judge the adequacy of the number of observations and 
the variety of the conditions under which observations are made.

Some judgments made in these attempts are non-controversial. The example
given is the fact that the color of the experimenter's socks can easily be 
ruled out as relevant to most experiments.

But in general the set of observations sufficient to make the inductive 
leap to a general law is a best guess, based on the current state of 
knowledge in the field of investigation.

Once we have general laws, of course, we can make logically valid deductive
arguments about what the laws entail, and use them to predict outcomes.

Food for thought on my part. The needed axiom of induction for physics, it
seems, is one about the continuity/uniformity of nature, akin to relativity.
That is, it is taken for granted that the patterns of events one sees for a
given precondition in one region of space/time/matter/force are invariant of the
specific region where the precondition holds. Does this make sense as an axiom
of science? Maybe it can be better stated by a physicist.

We just operate under the assumption of continuity until we find regions where it
fails, and then we have to come up with revised laws that eliminate that
failure and restore continuity. Is that the crux of the scientific method?


