
Chapter 13 - The New Experimentalism

In this chapter, we finally see a reasonable definition of the way science can
be seen as progressive.

So far in the book we have not seen a rational criteria for abandoning one
paradigm or research program for another that would satisfactorily explain 
major shifts in paradigm in the history of science as a rational process.

Here is the best we can do in addressing the issue so far. 

At any given time in the evolution of a theory, the theory has a set of
prediction that are considered confirmed (so far), and a set of predictions that
are considered anomalous (so far).

For theory A to be rationally better than theory B - AS FAR AS WE KNOW - 
A must have more confirmed predictions, and less anomalies than B.

As our technologies for measuring the predictions of the theories improve,
the confirmed and anomalous sets will change, and so the roles of A and B can
conceivably change.

An issue with this approach is that our measurement architecture may itself be
theory-dependent. So we'll have to include the theories used in our measurement
architecture in the specification when a theory is rationally better than
another.

There is also the issue of whether one can reasonably list all the predictions
of a theory and differentiate them in terms of confirmation and anomaly.

Finally it could take considerable elapsed time to convince ourselves that all
the important/relevant predictions of two theories have been adequately tested
and that theory A is indeed better in terms of its predictions as defined above.

This is the situation we find ourselves in by concentrating on theories and 
considering experiments as tests of theories.

The new experimentalists, on the other hand, focus on experiments, and try to
minimize the role of theory in defining science and understanding scientific
progress to very basic non-controversial theoretical concepts. An example of a
simple theory is a categorization of objects of interest in an experiment:
wires, tubes, batteries, springs, etc. We can take it for granted that these
kinds of objects are different from each other, and that they have specific
physical characteristics, as well as positions and velocities.

Suppose (1) that we only use simple non-controversial concepts like the above in
describing the setup and the measurment machinery of our experiments; (2) that
we provide a specification of the experiment and the expected observations that
anyone so inclined can use to repeat the experiment; (3) that all of a large
number of independent runs of the experiment do show the specified result. 

Then that is strong evidence for the reality of the specification of the
experiment and its expected result. The workings of such an experiment then
becomes part of the accumulated scientific knowledge. An in this sense science
progresses.

The example given in this chapter is Faraday's simple electiric motor
experiment. Faraday's contemporaries could successfully repeat the experiment
based on Faraday's specifications and verify that his motor works as specified.

Now, of course, there will be failures is some of those trials. But it would be absurd to
state that because occasionally one encounters a motor that does not work as
specified, that electric motors don't work. We can just say that electric motors 
have generally been found experimentally to work as specified. By using of the
word "generally" we signal that we are not using absolute induction.
We are just stating something about experiments of a certain type.

Suppose that at the beginning, many independent experimemnts yield the same
results, so our experimental results are accepted as valid, but later on some other
independent runs of the experiment contradict our expected result. In that
case, it is still the case that in those labs where the experiment succeeded,
the experimental result is valid. 

But the contradiction forces us to look for potential differences in the initial
conditions of the contradicting labs. If we find such differences, we can then
describe two experimemts, one for each of the two sets of initial conditions.
Again scientific knowledge has progressed.

In many experiments it is relatively easy to address objections to the manner 
of observation without appealing to complicated theory. For example, the validity 
of observations through a microscope may be made compelling in two ways.
We can take a picture of something observable by the naked eye, then reduce it
many thaousands of times, and observe it through a microscope as being identical
to the original. The "theory" we use is a theory of identity of shapes, which 
should be non-controversial.

If an objection is raised to one type of observation instrument, we can try 
other types of instruments whose working are clearly independent of the first.
Having two independent means of observation that yield the same results is
strong evidence for the reality of the observations.

Experiment has a life of its own. The results of an experiment can be explained 
by an underlying theory. The theory may change. But the experimental knowledge
will remain the same. In a sense then, theory can be thought of as just a tool,
a shorthand, for describing expected experimental results.

On the othe hand, if experimental results are to be used as evidence for a theory, 
one needs to show that they would be highly unlikely if the theory were wrong.

A theory restricts the set of possible observations in certain situations. An
experiment may only show that a superset of the possible observations were
possible. If the superset is much larger than that dictated by the theory, the
experiment is incoclusive. This is the case where the experiment has a wide
margins of error.

It is also possible that the experiment only show a subset of observable effects
predicted by a theory. In that case, the experiment only proves a special case
of the theory that entails the observed results. That is the case, for example,
in Eddington's observation of light bending as it passes close to the sun.
Einstein's theory of relativity predicts that. But it also predicts lots of
other things that are not the subject of Eddington's experiment. So it is
reasonable to assume that Eddington's finding supports a theory of attraction of
electomagnetic waves by masses (like Eistein's law of gravity), since the
bending observation seems unlikely without such a theory. But Eddington does not
support the general theory of relativity.

The formulation of experimental results as the fundamental constituents of
scientific knowledge can be taken quite far. And it has been, according to
Chalmers, by recent philosophers of science. The most prominent of these
philosophers, according to Chalmers is Deborah Mayo. 

If there is one author that I think should be pursued further based
on Chalmers, so far it looks like Mayo. Error and Growth In Experimental
Knowledge, 1996. However, that is a quite a hefty book.

