
Chapter 5 - Falsification

Popper was a logician. His philosophy is informed by that backgraound.

General theories are useful if they rule out certain patterns of natural
phenomena. If anything that could possibly transpire in the context of a given
theory can in fact transpire under the laws of that theory, then the theory is
of little use, since it cannot be used to predict outcomes, or explain
observations.

Since a useful theory rules out certain observations, if one can devise an
experiment within the context of the theory that results in those observations,
it would logically follow that the theory is not correct. Such observations
"falsify" the theory. So a theory that rules out certain observational patterns
in nature is called a "falsifiable" theory.

A theory's context may be understood as its input, and observed behavior in a
given context as its output. Then the idea of falsification can be seen as the 
well-known idea of testing a device or a computer program by feeding it input 
and checking the resulting output.

If the space of possible independent inputs to a device is infinite, no finite
test can establish the correctness of the device. But a single test that shows
the relation between some input and the corresponding output does not fit the
device's specification proves that the device is defective.

An interesting feature of falsification is that it only relies on deductive
logic. Deductive logic is non-controversial since in dedective logic the
information derived from a set of premises is already inherent in those
premises. No leaps of faith are necessary. Falsification thus completely avoids
the leaps of faith needed in using inductive logic.

In general a theory defines a relation, a set of pairs, {(context,
observation)}, where in a given context only the related observations are
allowed. Let's call this the "conforming" relation of a given theory.

Experiments made in a context, c, must yield observations o, such that (c, o) is
in the conforming relation of the theory. An experiment falsifies the theory if
it yields a (c, o) pair not in the theory's conforming relation.

The information conveyed by a theory depends on the contexts covered by it, and
for each context, c, by how precisely the allowed observations are specified,
that is, by how small is the set of conforming observations in context c.

By using this idea of the information content of a theory, we can define 
a partial order on the set of theories and thereby have a precise definition 
for when one theory subsumes another.
  
A theory A has >= information-bearing status than theory B (and hence subsumes
B) if A's contexts include B's contexts, and if in addition, for each of B's
contexts, no more observations are allowed in A than in B. Thus, A is at least
as general and at least as precise as B. As general since it applies everywhere
where B applies. And as precise, since in contexts shared by B it allows no
more observations than B.

A theory that is more information-bearing is more falsifiable, that is, it 
provides more opportnities for falsification. First, there may be more contexts
in which the theory can be falsified. And second, in the shared contexts, 
the theory may allow less observed outcomes, and therefore more opportunities
to falsify. So the definition of information-bearing is nicely captured 
by the extent of falsifiability.

Falsification simply finesses the issues with induction, by allowing that 
any theory whasoever is legitimate as long as it has not been falsified as yet.

Falsification provides a view of the progress of science in a given area as a
sequence of crises engendered by the falsification of a theory, each of which
motivates the invention of a better theory that only lasts until it is
falsified.

However, falsification per se can only tell us about defects in a theory.
Falsification per se, says nothing about why a particular scientific theory
should be believed as a true statement about nature.

To get confidence about an as yet unfalsified theory, there must be convincing
evidence that sufficient attempts have been made to falsifiy the theory without
success. But that again puts us in a state of vagaries of definitions and
subjective judgments!

