Chapter 2

Some observations can be active and public. Active means that the observer
varies the context of observation to reduce the chance of observing the wrong
thing. Public means the resulting perception is straighforward enough that 
other people can be convinced of its reality, and can do the observation 
themselves with little training. 

There are lots of observations for which being active and public reduces the
chance of inappropriate perception to a negligible level. Under these
conditions, making reasonable statements about the facts of an observation can
be non-controversial.

There are two issues from the point of view of a skeptic of such an
observational statement: that the statements still depend on some basic model
of the world, and that the instruments used for observation are suspect.

Regarding the first issue, my thinking is that the models used would be so
simple that a reasonable skeptic would be easily convinced of its validity. I
guess no reasonable person would object to the idea that objects have different
colors and shapes. So to the extent that the "model" of the world used in
observation statements depends on such common "theories", a corresponding
observational statement should be acceptable by a reasonable person.

Regarding the second issue, namely interference from the observational
instrument, Chalmers uses the example of Galileo's observation of the moons of
Jupiter. Skeptics would object that the observed moons may be relics of
Galileo's telescope, rather than images of actual objects in the heavens. 

But reasonable critics would have to agree that it is quite unlikely 
that interference from the telescope would vary with time in exactly the 
same way as if the moons were orbiting Jupiter. Conjectures about the possible
interference of the telescope in the observation would easily be refuted 
by Galileo by appeal to common sense. At the end of the day, no other conjecture 
explaining the telescopic images would come close to the conjecture that 
Jupiter has moons, and that obsevational statement would come to be
accepted.

In my machine analogy, the machine is the telescope attached to a video
recorder, and the output would be a sequence of digital images of what is
observed through the telescope. The only "perceptual" processing done by our
"machine" is magnification, whose "thoery" should be non-controversial.

The main issue in this case is convincing skeptics that any other effect caused
from the machine is irrelevant to the observation statements made, that is the
basic structure of the materials in the space around Jupiter over time.

