Chapter 3 - Experiment

To obtain factual observational statements in science, scientists use carefully
controlled experiments. That is because generally many factors affect
uncontrolled naturally-occurring phenomena, but our scientific hypotheses to be
tested against nature relate to just one or at least very few of those factors. 

Science often attempts to reduce a complex situation into a number of simple
parts that are superimposed on top of each other. One can then study each
constituent part more easily in isolation, and only later deal with their
superposition. 

To observe the workings of an isolated phenomenon, one needs to devise a
controlled experiment in which other phenomena are either not present or 
their presence is irrelevant to the hypothesis being tested.

At a given point in the development of a scientific field, there are questions
for which we do not have secure answers. Scientists then conjecture different
possible hypotheses to settle a given outstanding question. And the
conjectured hypotheses are then put to the test by using controlled
experiments.

The problem with experiments is that for a variety of reasons their results are
fallible. First, the available technology for isolating a particular effect to
be put under test may not be adequate. Second, the theory that informs what
other effects may contribute to the observed behavior in an experiment may be
wrong or under-developed. Third, assumptions about the relevance of the
observational statements resulting from the experiment to settling the
hypothesis in question may be in error.

Chalmers provides interesting examples of these issues from the history of 
science. Some of the examples:

Ionization of extraneous gases in a cathode ray tube interfering with the
expected deflection of charged particles. 

Small size of the laboratory interfering with the observation of the speed of
radio waves.

Measurement of the atomic weight of substances in the presence of different
isotopes in the samples being measured yielding non-integral atomic weights.

The upshot is the obvious fact that experimental results are subject 
to revision as better technologies become available, and as the theoretical
assumptions informing the hypothesis and its complicating factors evolve.

Finally Chalmers warns against falling into the trap of circular reasoning 
in experimental design.

Circularity can arise by mixing the theory that informs the experimental design
with the theory that is being tested by the experiment. The hypothesis under
test should be independent of the theoretical assumptions made in isolating and
observing the phenomenon under test lest we end up justifying the hypothesis by
a circular argument. 

Thus, for experimental results to form a sound basis for scientific knowledge,
we need a layering of theories, where experiments to test theories at higher
levels only use assumptions based on theories at lower levels in their setup.
This scheme is similar to the layering of sets in set theory to avoid Russell's
paradox.


