
Chapter 8 - Kuhn

This chapter discusses Kuhn's contributions to the philosophy of science.
Kuhn was principally a historian of science and his philosophy is informed 
by that background.

The basic structure of scientific knowledge acquisition proposed by Kuhn is 
summarized as:

    repeat: normal science -> crisis -> revolution -> normal science -> ...

On its face, Kuhn's model looks like an elaboration of the falsification model.
It adds the idea of "normal science" to the ideas of falsification (leading to
"crisis") and modification (engendered by a theoretical "evolution"). Normal 
science is basically the elaboration and consolidation of a theory. 

In Kuhn's conception, normal science takes for granted a certain model of the
world, as well as certain standards for valid observations, and within the
constraints of the accepted models and standards, pushes the boundaries of
theoretical and experimental knowledge about the given field in an incremental
way. The set of accepted models and behavioral standards forms the core of what
Kuhn calls a "paradigm", an agreed-upon context for doing scientific research.

I am not going to go into further details about Kuhn's model since they are 
readily avaliable and relatively well-known.

But this chapter showed me a new aspect of Kuhn's model that I had not appreciated
on my first reading of his book, namely the sociological nature of scientific
revolutions (and the ensuing paradigm formations), and the resulting de-emphasis
of the idea of progress in a scientific field over time.

Basically as told by Chalmers, Kuhn considers the acceptance of a new paradigm
based on revolutionaly ideas in a scientific field as a sociological affair, in
which the practitioners in the field are converted one by one to believe in the
new paradigm, not just because of the theory's ability to better explain the
given field and to remove falsifications, but also by a variety of other
concerns. These concerns have to do with things like "values, tolerances,
disdains" of the scientific community that had been working within the context
of the old paradigm. The simplest word that comes to my mind for describing them
is "political". To me, that aspect of the evolution of science, if true, is
cause for concern. 

Kuhn does attempt to clarify his thoughts in the postscript of a later edition
of his book, by stating a rational notion of progress in terms of new paradigms
being applicable in more contexts. 

But according to Chalmers the basic thrust of Kuhn's argument is a basically
"relativist" view of the evolution of scientific thought in which a new
paradigm's being more "beautiful" is in the eye of the beholders (the scientific
community of the given field) without necessarily entailing a rational concept
of progress in understanding the world.

There is a lot more to this chanpter than my summary. But for me the big picture
is the sociological/political aspect of scietific revolutions. Something that if
accepted as the norm, would fuel the already shaky standing of science in the
first half of the 21'st century, with vaccine hesitancy and climate denial.

