
My Take on Chalmers' Principles of Argument from Coincidence

Principle 1. Observational Fidelity. 

A number of different factors go into making sure that observations used in
support of a theory are non-controversial. 

Observations must be repeatable by many different agents in many different contexts. 

Observations should only depend on already-strongly-verified theories. 

Observations should be relevant and significant.

Observations should use experimemts that isolate the situation to the effects 
claimed to be involved in a phenomenom.

Different observations made by instruments whose working mechanisms are unrelated 
strengthen observational fidelity. 

When instruments are used to make indirect observations, convincing
arguments need to be made that the observed effects are unrelated to the quirks
of the instruments.

These factors motivate obvious questions one may ask of someone claiming an
observed effect. Was it repeated in multiple contexts by multiple people?
Is the theory you are using to derive a quantity of interest from raw
observations strongly supported? 

Principle 2. Non-evasiveness. 

Chalmers separates out theories that he describes as merely "accommodating" to
the evidence as relatively unconvincing. I rather like the designation "evasive"
for such theories. Basically an evasive theory is one that fudges its
formulation to dodge falsifications. 

It is useful to distinguish between two types of fudging, which may be called
pre-canonization and post-canonization. 

Before a theory is proposed for widespread adoption, of course, it has to undergo 
corrections as new experimental evidence about it is generated. That seems perfectly 
legitimate. 

On the other hand, falsifications may surface once a theory is canonized into a 
widely accepted law. What to do in such a case? Add one heuristic patch after another
for each newly-discovered falsification? Or try to come up with a more general
theory of which the earlier formulation is a limiting case. The former is a
"theory smell". The latter is legitimate progress in science.

Of course, it is not necessarily easy to decide at the time of a correction.
whether the correction is a fudging "patch" or a reasonable "extension".

However, a theory that is stubbornly clung to with patch after unrelated patch
would seem suspect. Such a theory is less convincing than a rival theory that 
is devoid of patches and subsumes the earlier formulation as a special case.

Consider the case of Ptolemaic epicycles given by Chalmers as an example of
"accommodation" or evasiveness. My guess is that the epicycles were a purely
descriptive theory of the motion of celestial bodies, and that the Greeks did
not have a general epicyclic theory of how multiple celestial bodies move with
respect to each other. In that sense, the discovery of each new celestial body
would necessitate a "patch" to the epicyclic descriptions. However, I don't think
that can be considered a negative at the time of the Greek astronomers. I am
guessing that it is only after the rival theories of Copernicus, Galileo and
Newton came along, that the Ptolemaic epicycle theories could be seen as
wanting.

BTW. An interesting case of pre-canonization theory correction is machine
learning (used, for example, in ChatGPT). In machine learning, one starts by
proposing a random theory, and then successive training rounds of the machine
adjust its internal parameters to reduce the difference between its predictions
and real-world observations.

Principle 3. Strong Auxiliaries. 

Auxiliaries are background assumptions that are used in interpreting
observations and making predictions based on the theory.

One example given by Chalmers is the use of the distance of the stars in
calculating parallax: the change in the position of a star when observed from
different locations. Given the Copernican theory of the rotation of the planets
around the sun, it is possible to calculate parallax for various stars if one
knows the distances of the stars. Here the assumptions about the distances of the
stars is an "auxiliary". Based on the distance assumptions at the time, parallax
should have been observed for certain stars if Copernicus was right. But it was
not. However, it turned out later that the distance assumptions were the cause
of the apparent falsification, and not the basic Copernican theory.

So it is necessary to isolate the auxiliary assumptions leading to a prediction, 
and for each require strong independent evidence.

Principles 4 and 5 - Introduction

The next two principles concern what I call 'analytical theories': theories that
relate cause and effect by means of detailed explicitly-provided procedures.
Analytical theories provide an ontology of entities, properties, and
relationships that are considered causes, and a mathematical/algorithmic
specification of the mechanisms by which these causes affect observed effects.

Analytical theories are a class of what in an earlier note I called explanatory
theories. They may be contrasted with philosophical theories which may also
propose an ontology but do not provide the detailed specification of the 
mechanisms leading from cause to effect.

The ontology and mechanisms detailed in an analytical theory can lead to a
variety of predicted phenomena.

Principle 4. Coverage of Analytical Theories. 

Suppose that strong evidence exists for one of the observed phenomena predicted
by an analytical theory. Coverage basically asks the question: How strong is
the evidence for a given prediction as evidence for an entire theory?

An example given by Chalmers is Eddington's confirmation of the bending of light
by gravity, a prediction of general relativity. That is certainly 'an' evidence
for general relativity. But it only proves the bending of light. It is not
strong evidence for the whole ontology and mechanisms of general relativity.

In order to sort out the relation between evidence and theory, it is suggested
that we try to partition a theory into distinct parts, and only make claims for
the parts of the theory that are strongly tested. For a theory as a whole to be
accepted, there must be strong evidence for all its parts.

I have not thought through the guidelines for partitioning a theory. But it seems
plausible that when one is presented with a piece of evidence for a theory, one
needs to ask whether it cover the entire theory. If not, one may legitimately
consider weaker theories that just stick to the evidence at hand.

5. Variety of Evidence for Analytical Theories.

An analytical theory can lead to predictions in a variety of phenomena, some of
which may, at first blush, seem to be quite unrelated. The more phenomena
is explained and tested by an analytical theory, the stronger the case for that
theory.

The obvious example is Newton's laws of motion and gravity, which explain and
have been tested for various phenomena include billiard balls, planetary motion, 
tides, etc.

I am thinking that in a sense this principle is the mirror image of the 
coverage principle, and so the two may be combined into a single whole.
But I have not thought through the details. 

