
Catgoeries of Theories 

Descriptive Theories

A descriptive theory relates cause and effect by pure curve-fitting, without
appeal to an underlying mechanism.

We measure the characteristics of a phenomenon in various contexts, e.g., at
different times, and come up with a formula that fits those measurements based
on the context. Then we use induction to elevate that formula to a theory.

I'll call the set of all contexts in which a theory is supposed to hold, that
theory's "domain".

A descriptive theory is predictive in the sense that its formula can be applied
to parts of its domain that did not participate in the original measurements
used in its curve-fitting.

I would include Ptolemian epicycle theory in the category of descriptive
theories. The theory predicts the locations of planets in the future. So its
predictions can be put to the test. As far as I can tell, the domain of a
Ptolemian epicycle theory is a particular set of planets and moons.  When new
bodies in the solar system are discovered, we are outside the domain of the
earlier epicycle theory, and must extend the theory by adding epicycles and
possibly modifying existing ones.

Thus, while the Greeks up to Ptolemy devised a general "framework" for
describing the motions of a set of planets, the application of the framework to
a set of planets in their system was ad hoc, AFAIK.

Explanatory Theories

An explanatory theory relates cause and effect by appeal to an underlying
mechanism.

From the point of view of testability, when the specific details of the proposed
underlying mechanism are provided, useful avenues of testing emerge above and
beyond the predictions of the original phenomenon leading to the theory.

It may be the case, for example, that the underlying mechanisms imply other,
hitherto out-of-focus properties of the phenomenon of interest. Or it may be
that the underlying mechanisms entail predictions about other seemingly
unrelated phenomena.

All these additional predictions would then be subject to tests. Because a
richer set of tests then apply to the theory, when it withstands severe testing,
the argument from coincidence for it becomes more convincing.

Analytical Theories

I'll call an explanatory theory that precisely specifies the mechanisms by which
causes lead to effects as an 'analytical theory'.

Newton's laws are analytical in describing the movements of the planets, but
also of a variety of other phenomena. And therefore provide a very rich set of
predictions for testing.

All else being equal, an explanatory theory is to be preferred to a purely
descriptive one (or so I am claiming), if, in fact, the explanatory claim is
well-tested.

Philosophical Theories

Not all supposedly explanatory theories provide sufficient details for the
proposed underlying mechanisms to lead to tests, however.

In a philosophical theory, a mechanism is suggested by means of which it would
be possible, in principle, to explain certain phenomena. But the details, if
provided at all, are insufficient to allow testable predictions.

This is the case, for example, for the atomic theory of change proposed by the
Greeks. Change can happen as a result of the rearrangement of atoms. But no
procedure was given by the Greeks as to how the rearrangement would work to
affect a certain kind of change.

Because philosophical theories are not subject to testing, they are not
considered scientific. But there are times when philosophical assumptions are
mixed into an ostensibly testable theory. Chalmers offers the assumption of
absolute space in Newton's laws as an example.

Care must be taken to separate out the philosophical aspects of a claim, and
make scientific claims only about the concrete testable parts of the theory that
have been subjected to severe tests.

Accommodating Theories

Chalmers also makes a distinction between what he calls 'accommodating' theories
and genuine theories.

His most convincing example of an accommodating theory goes as follows: suppose
I propose a theory and you find a falsification for it. I can just amend my
theory by excluding the falsifying context from my theory's domain.

Accommodating theories are treated as inferior by Chalmers, as they seem fudged
and contrived. Clearly, as Chalmers points out, if one is allowed simply to
exclude falsifying contexts from the domain of the theory after the fact, that
would make a mockery of testing.

However, as we have seen in Lakatos, in practice, falsifications are often
tolerated for promising theories to some degree, in the hope of finding a
reasonable solution to the resulting puzzle, without abandoning the theory
wholesale. In that light, there is a place for seemingly accommodating theories
in the development of a field of research, and the distinction between
accommodating and genuine theories becomes somewhat arbitrary in that context. 

Are the epicyclic theories of the movement of the planets accommodating? Chalmers
seems to imply that, since falsifying measurements lead to a reworking of the
epicycles involved. I am not so sure. Perhaps one can equally think of epicycle
theories as theories superseded as limiting cases of more general theories
involving additional celestial bodies.


